.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\" to preview it
.TH RMLINT 1 "NOV 2010" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
rmlint \- tool to find/eliminate lint on your filesystem 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  rmlint [TargetDir[s]] [File[s]] [Options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
rmlint is a command line tool to remove various sort of unused files form a Unix filesystem, especially duplicate files.
.br
It can take several directories or raw files as input and finds empty files/directories, duplicates, nonstripped binaries, bad links, old tempdata and broken filenames.
.br
It offers lots of options and writes both a ready-to-use shellscript and a easy-to-parse logfile.
.br
Additional features in a nutshell: Pretty fast & handy.
.SH GETTING STARTED 
If you just want to clean your Musicarchive you simply can run "rmlint /path/to/Music".
.br
Rmlint WON'T REMOVE ANYTHING BY DEFAULT, it justs outputs a neat script (and a log) 
.br
that you may have a look at first, and execute afterwards. 
.br
If you don't want to execute a script you may add the "-m noask" option to remove the 
.br
duplicates directly. 
.br 
Also note that you can abort (Ctrl-C) rmlint at any time, or hard abort with pressing Ctrl-C twice.
.br

.SH GENERAL OPTIONS
.IP "-t --threads <t>" 
Set the number of threads used maximally during processing. 
.br
Note that this may have only minor impact on actual speed.
.br
By default 16 threads are used, what should be a sane default for most machines.
.IP "-p --paranoid"
Compare each found duplicate byte-by-byte with original. 
.br
Be aware that this is a lot slow (and not enabled by default therefore).
.br
(See also the FALSE POSITIVES section) 
.IP "-j --junkchars <chars>"
Looks on each file/dir if it contains one letter of <chars> 
This is useful to find unwanted filenames like "me@++rbat'!"
By default no name is marked as unwanted. 
.IP "-a --nonstripped"
Search for non-stripped binaries (i.e. binaries with debug symbols) 
This is quite slow so it's not enabled by default.
.IP "-n --namecluster"
Search for files having the same 
.BR basename (1).
Disabled by default.
.IP "-z --limit"
Limit files to be searched by size; Min. and Max. size passed like this: "1000;-1"  (Default: "-1;-1")
.IP "-l --badids"
Search for files with bad UserIDs and/or GroupIDs. Enabled by default. (Use -L to disable)
.IP "-y --emptydirs"
Search for empty dirs. Enabled by default. (Use -Y to disable)
.IP "-K --emptyfiles"
Search for empty files. Enabled by default. (Use -K to disable)
.IP "-x --oldtmp <sec>"
Search for files with a '~'/'.swp' suffix being min. <sec> seconds older than the corresponding file without the '~'/'.swp'
The default value is 60 seconds.
.IP "-d --maxdepth <depth>"
Only recurse to a max. depth of <depth> in directories.
If you want to have (for example) only the files of a folder, but not of it's subfolders set this to 1.
.br
By default rmlint will recurse to infinity.
.IP "-f --followlinks" 
If set links are followed. Rmlint also may follow links out of the directory, i.e. to '/',
.br
that's why it's disabled by default, and you're normally are not supposed to need it.
.br
Without this option hardlinks get counted as duplicates, what's probably what you want.
.br
No file is reported twice though!
.IP "-s --samepart" 
Never cross mountpoints. (Default: No.)
.IP "-G --hidden" 
Also search through hidden files / directories. (Disabled by default) 
.IP "-m --mode" 
Tell rmlint what to do with found duplicates (duplicates only! does not apply to empty dirs etc. *) )
.IP " " 16
"--mode list":  Only list files, w.o any change. 
                This is the default.
.IP " " 16
"--mode ask":   Ask for each file what to do.  
.IP " " 16
"--mode noask": Remove files without asking.  
.IP " " 16
"--mode link":  Symlink duplicates with original **) 
.IP " " 16
"--mode cmd":   Execute a command give with -c / -C on 
                duplicate / original. (See -c / -C) 

.IP " " 16
*)  Simply because you duplicates are the thing you gonna find. Everything else can be done more comfortable with the log/script. 
.IP " " 16
**) rmlint does not know for sure what the duplicate and what the original is (It would need to ask you). 
.br
    It takes the one with the lowest inode number, because in most cases this is the file which was created first on the HD.
.br 
    See also the GENERAL NOTES section for the '//' feature.

.IP "-c --cmd_dup <cmd>" 
Execute a shellcommand on found duplicates when used with '-m cmd'
.IP "-C --cmd_orig <md>" 
Execute a shellcommand on original files when used with '-m cmd'

Example: rmlint testdir -m cmd -C "ls '<orig>'" -c "ls -lasi '<dupl>' #== '<orig>'" -v5
.br
This would print all found files (both duplicates and originals via the 'ls' utility
.br
The "<orig>" (of -C) expands to the original, <dupl> (of '-c') to the duplicate.
.br
Note1: Writing <dupl> in the string given to -C won't do anything.
.br
Note2: If -m cmd is not given but -c/-C, then rmlint's default commands are overwritten with those.

.SH REGEX OPTIONS
.IP "-r --fregex <pat>"
Checks basenames against the pattern <pat>
.IP "-R --dregex <pat>"
Checks dir-basenames against the pattern <pat>
Note that the Input directory gets not checked against <pat>
.IP "-i --invmatch"
Invert match - Only investigate when not containing <pat> (Default: No.)
.IP "-e --matchcase"
Matches case of paths ("A_FILE" != "a_file") (disabled by default)

.SH MISC OPTIONS
.IP "-h --help" 
Prints a short version of this manpage.

.IP "-o --output [<out>]" 
Outputs log/scriptfile to <out>.sh/<out>.log
.br
Specify no argument to write no script/log.
.br
Note: You have to write the name directly after the "-o" option.
.br
e.g: -omyoutput will give myoutput.sh and myoutput.log 
.br
This unusal syntax is due to some quirks with getopt.

.IP "-B --no-color"
Don't use colored output.

.IP "-v --verbosity <v>"
Set the verbosity level to <v> 
Where: 
0: print nothing.
.br
1: + prints errors (if any) and results (without colors) 
.br
2: + prints warnings (if any) 
.br
3: + Additional info. 
.br
4: * Dumps the log to stdout (rmlint will write also a log to HD)
.br
5: * Dumps the script to stdout (rmlint will write also a log to HD)
.br
6: * rdfind-like informative output.
.br

Set to 2 by default. 
.br

.SH GENERAL NOTES 
1) All non-option arguments are treated as paths. (either to file or directories)
.br
2) If multiple directoires are given, and in both are found duplicates you may prepend a dirpath
.br
   with a '//' which will cause rmlint to treat the file found first in the //-directory as original.
.br
   Future versions might treat all files in the //-directory as original.
.br
   If none is given the file with the lowest inode is considered as original.
.br
3) All boolean options (B,p,f,s,e,G,o,i,n,a,y,x,u) have a counterpart as upper-case option (b,P,F,S,E,g,O,I,N,A,Y,X,U) doing the exact opposite.
.br
   The corresponding long options have a "no-" in front of them: --emptydirs <-> --no-emptydirs
.br
4) If no path is given the actual working directory is scanned. 
.br
5) If multiple paths are given a consistency check is done (double inodes are filtered), so no path is given twice. 
.br

.SH EXAMPLES

.IP
# Search for lint in the current working directory.
.IP 
"rmlint"                

# Search for non stripped binaries, nameclusters, old tmp data and duplicates in /bin.
.IP
"rmlint -nayxp /bin"     

# Search on the toplevel of Music and on the first sublevel. Also in hidden directories and also follow links. 
.IP 
"rmlint -d 2 -fG ./Music 

# Search the current working directory, but only on files containing an 'a' in their name and on dirs that have a 'b'. 
.IP
"rmlint -r "a" -R "b"    

# Output log/script to "mylog.log"/"mylog.sh" and the log also to stdout. 
.IP
"rmlint -omylog -v 4"    

# Remove duplicates without asking.
.IP 
"rmlint --mode noask"  

# Write no log/script and only search for duplicates in ALL subdirs 
.IP
"rmlint -o -GYX" 

# Doing your own layout with 'echo'
.IP
rmlint ~/HD/Documents -v1 -G -t 16 -c "echo '<dupl>'" -m cmd -Y -C "echo '=> <orig>'"

.SH FILES
rmlint writes two files (by default in the working directory):

.I rmlint.sh
.RS
A ready to execute shellscript to remove the found lint.
.br
rmlint will choose appropiate commands for every file.
.br
Note: paths are enclosed with singlequotes,
.br
pathnames that contain a singlequote themselves, are escaped with ''"'"'' 
.br 
By default the user is prompted a warning, and is required to hit enter to continue,
.br
unless -d is passed to the script.
.RE

.I rmlint.log
.RS
A not-executable log in an easy-to-parse form.
.br
You can find information on how each row is formatted in the logfile itself.
.br
Please note: The md5sums there do not match the md5sums calculated by the md5sum utility!
.br
A short method or this in ruby would look like this: 

.RS
Getting a list of lint from rmlint.log:

Inside a terminal:
.br
.nf

	ruby -e "File.new(\\"/tmp/rmlint.log\\",\\"r\\").each {|c| print c.split(/\\/\\//),\\"\\n\\" unless c[0] == '#'}"

.fi
.br
.nf
Inside a clean ruby program:

	def justParseIt 
		# Parse types out of log 
		aFile = File.new("/tmp/rmlint.log","r")	
		aFile.each do |line|
		
			if  line[0] != '#'
				splitline = line.split(/\\/\\//)
				print "Type: ",splitline[0],"=",splitline[2],"\\n"
			end
		end
		puts "-------------------------------------"
		aFile.close
	end 
.fi
.SH FALSE POSITIVES
To cut a long story short: None.
.RE
rmlint uses md5sums internally to decide wether a file is a duplicate or not (and lots of other dirty tricks). 
.br
One disadvantage of md5sums are the occurence of 'collisions' (i.e.: two different files have the same md5sum). 
.br
This nevertheless happens very rarely + rmlint also checks the first/last/middle bytes + the size of a file.
.br
So the resulting propability of having a collsions resulting in a false positive is lots lower than having a bug somewhere in the program.
.br

.br
Still being scared? 
.br
You can use the -p option to do a true byte by byte comparasion of each file, at the cost of a slowdown.
.br
.SH VERSION
Use rmlint -V
.SH BUGS
Please help me if you found one, so others don't suffer from it:
.br
Please email your find to <sahib@online.de>, 
.br
or alternatively submit an issue on https://github.com/sahib/rmlint/issues
.br
with a detailed description and/or backtrace. 
.br
Patches are welcome too of course! 
.br
.SH AUTHOR 
Christopher Pahl <sahib@online.de>
.br
See also the AUTHORS file in rmlint's distribution for a complete list.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR md5sum (1),
.BR find(1),
.BR symlink(2)
.BR sunlight (7),
